---
layout: post
title: Setting up this website
date: 2025-05-26
description: Difficulties and solutions for setting up this website
tag: ["computer science"]
categories: thoughts
---

I decided that I should set up a personal website, but at the same time I have 
never done anything like HTML or CSS before, nor do I want to learn about that.
I then watched some youtube videos and find out that `jekyll` and this 
`al-folio` template seems pretty cool, and it doesn't seem too hard, so I begin 
setting it up.

As the `INSTALL.md` file in the `al-folio` repository recommended, I was 
following the guide and try to set up through Docker containers. Then I realized
that I know nothing about Docker, except for what are Docker images, Docker 
containers, and Docker registries. What this leads to is that after hitting 
Enter after typing in the `docker compose up`, I did not even realize the 
things is already running, because I was waiting for the command to finish 
running and it takes forever. After I finally realized this fact, I could not 
see anything in `http://localhost:8080`. This is when I realized there 
is actually an ERROR! Indeed, the log says 
```
jekyll-1  | bundler: failed to load command: jekyll (/usr/local/bundle/bin/jekyll)
jekyll-1  | /usr/local/bundle/gems/bundler-2.6.6/lib/bundler/definition.rb:695:in 'Bundler::Definition#materialize': Could not find nokogiri-1.18.8-x86_64-linux-gnu in locally installed gems (Bundler::GemNotFound)
```
even though the previous command `docker compose pull` tells me `jekyll` is 
already pulled. After I stuck here for about one hour, I was ready to call it 
a day, but I decided to give it another try.

I decided to roll back to the local setup method, which is supposedly not 
recommended. I then decide to follow [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fV01b0duZwU&t=632s) 
to download ruby, jekyll, bundler, or whatever those are. However, the command 
in the video is not working for me at all! Supposedly it should install 
this thing called `chruby` and `chruby` will download `ruby 3.3.5`. These 
steps goes well but then `ruby -v` still gives me version 2.6, and I have 
zero idea how to change it. 

I finally decide to search up how to download and use a specific ruby version, 
and most answers in stack overflow is referring to this `rbenv` thing, which 
I suppose is similar to `chruby`. Therefore, I installed it and successfully 
used the `rbenv global 3.3.5` command to conclude the success of this step.
Then I installed some more stuff like jekell and bundler, which again I have 
no idea on. There might again be some version issues happening during the 
process but it was 1am and I could not recall it. Then this deployment command 
`bundle exec jekyll serve` finally runs successfully and I was able to see 
the template website at `http://localhost:4000`. 

Even so, one thing that annoys me VERY MUCH is that there is this `rbenv:3.3.5` 
that shows up on my terminal, to the right of every prompt. I am honestly so 
pissed off by this because I do not want any of thses showing up on my terminal 
every day. I searched on stack overflow how to get rid of it and did not get 
any good answer. I also did not see a `PROMPT` field in my `.zshrc` so I 
suppose it must be somewhere else. Very unfortunately I have yet to figure out 
a solution for this and I am stuck with this thing that torture my several 
hours on my terminal.

After a whole night sleep I did some editing of the template to remove the
pages I do not really want and filled in some actual content. Now I think 
the website is at a relatively complete state and I will call it here. 

Stay tuned for more random thoughts. 