---
layout: post
title: Counting numbers
date: 2025-01-29
description: An number counting dynamic programming problem.
tag: ["computer science", "algorithms"]
categories: study
---

This is a document I wrote a while ago, before I create this website. 
It is quite interesting, so I am making 
this my first blog post on this website to help me set up the blog section 
and keep the document.

---

I was doing some practices on the CSES problem set, and this number counting
dynamic programming problem interests me a lot. This is an example of a type 
of problems where we need to count numbers that satisfies a given requirement, 
but the range of the numbers is too large for us to check one by one, such as 
$$10^{18}$$. Therefore, we need to use dynamic programming to speed up the 
counting. This is also the first time I solve a problem like this, so I decide
to document my thought process and solution.

## Problem

Count the number of integers between $$a$$ and $$b$$ where **no two adjacent digits are the same**.

#### Input 

The only input line has two integers $$a$$ and $$b$$.

#### Output

Print one integer -- the answer to the problem.

#### Constraints

The integers $$a$$ and $$b$$ are such that $$0 \leq a \leq b \leq 10^{18}$$

#### Example

Input
```
123 321
```
Output
```
171
```

## Solution

If we can calculate the number of integers between $$0$$ and $$n$$ with no two adjacent digits for any nonnegative $$n$$, then the answer is just the count for $$[0, b]$$ and minus the count for $$[0, a - 1]$$. 
We will write a function called `solve` that solves this reduced problem.

Note that for a number to have no two adjacent digits being the same, the first 
and second digit on the left 
cannot be the same, and the "subnumber" starting from the 
second digits on the left and all the way to the right cannot have two ajacent 
digits being the same either. We have then found a natural subproblem for 
dynamic programming. 

First count the number of integers with $$i$$ digits that start with some digit (for example starting with $$1$$, or $$2$$, it doesn't matter), have no adjacent digits being the same, call this $$f_i$$. Note that we do not consider any leading zeros here. This might be a bit confusing to parse. Consider this example --- $$f_3$$ is the number of 3-digits numbers that start with a $$1$$ and have no adjacent digits being the same. Then we note that $$f_i = 9_{i-1}$$, since we already set the first digit and the second digit has $$9$$ options for it to be different than the first. Also $$f_1 = 1$$, because for example there is only one 1-digit number that start with the digit $$2$$, namely the number $$2$$. We can preprocess $$f_i$$ for $$1 \leq i \leq 18$$.

```c++
const int N = 19;
long long l, r;
unsigned long long f[N];
int a[N];

int main() {
    cin >> l >> r;
    f[1] = 1LL;
    for (int i = 2; i < N; i++) {
        f[i] = 9LL * f[i - 1];
    }
    cout << solve(r) - solve(l - 1) << endl;
}
```

For our main function `solve`, we first need to convert the number into an array of digits.

```c++
unsigned long long solve(long long n) {
    if (n < 0) return 0;
    if (n == 0) return 1;

    int len = 0;
    unsigned long long res = 0;
    while (n > 0) {
        len++;
        a[len] = n % 10;
        n /= 10;
    }
    // ......
}
```

To illustrate this with an example, consider `solve(2413)`. Then the `a` array and the variable `len` would be

```
a = [0, 3, 1, 4, 2]
len = 4
```

Now we start the counting process, for a number with 4 digits and the leading digit being `0` and `1`, there is `f[4]` integers without two adjacent digits being the same.
For leading digit `2` we have to consider the boundary so we handle that using next iteration. The next iteration is essentially counting the number of integers with 4 digits, starting with `2`, and no two adjacent digits are the same. For `0`, `1`, `2` and `3` on `a[3]` we can use our `f[3]` value directly and we handle the boundary `4` with next iteration. Therefore, our main loop is

```c++
bool flag = false;
for (int i = len; i >= 1; i--) {
    res += (long long)a[i] * f[i];
    if (i < len && a[i] > a[i + 1]) res -= f[i];
    if (i < len && a[i] == a[i + 1]) {
        flag = true;
        break;
    }
}
if (!flag) res++;
```

Notice that when `a[i] > a[i + 1]`, we should not count the numbers with `a[i] = a[i + 1]` so we use `res -= f[i]` to handle that. In addition, when `a[i] = a[i + 1]` since we are essentially counting the numbers starting with `a[i+1 : len]` in later iterations and `a[i] = a[i + 1]` indicates the presence of two adjacent digits being the same, we break from the loop. Finally the `flag` and `res++` is used to handle the number itself.

To deal with leading zeros, we remove the contribution from leading digits being zeros first by `res -= f[len]`, and then add the contribution from integers with `j` digits starting with `1` to `9` (ensuring no leading zeros) for `1 <= j <= len`.

```c++
res -= f[len];
for (int j = 1; j < len; j++) {
    res += 9LL * f[j];
}
res++;
```

`res++` is used to handle the number `0`. This finishes this function and the complete solution code is as follows.

```c++
const int N = 19;
long long l, r;
unsigned long long f[N];
int a[N];

unsigned long long solve(long long n) {
    if (n < 0) return 0;
    if (n == 0) return 1;

    int len = 0;
    unsigned long long res = 0;
    while (n > 0) {
        len++;
        a[len] = n % 10;
        n /= 10;
    }
    bool flag = false;
    for (int i = len; i >= 1; i--) {
        res += (long long)a[i] * f[i];
        if (i < len && a[i] > a[i + 1]) res -= f[i];
        if (i < len && a[i] == a[i + 1]) {
            flag = true;
            break;
        }
    }
    if (!flag) res++;

    res -= f[len];
    for (int j = 1; j < len; j++) {
        res += 9LL * f[j];
    }
    res++;
    return res;
}

int main() {
    cin >> l >> r;
    f[1] = 1LL;
    for (int i = 2; i < N; i++) {
        f[i] = 9LL * f[i - 1];
    }
    cout << solve(r) - solve(l - 1) << endl;
}
```